Add cdc improved private link document. (#21929)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/set-up-sink-private-endpoint.md

</div>

<div label="Azure">

If your changefeed downstream service is hosted on Azure, collect the alias of the Private Link Service of your downstream service.

If the Private Endpoint Service is not available for your downstream service, follow [Step 2. Expose the Kafka cluster as Private Link Service](/tidb-cloud/setup-azure-self-hosted-kafka-private-link-service.md#step-2-expose-the-kafka-cluster-as-private-link-service) to set up the load balancer and the Private Link Service.

</div>
</SimpleTab>

## Step 1. Open the private endpoint creation page

1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/).
2. Navigate to the overview page of your TiDB Cloud Dedicated cluster, and then click **Settings** > **Networking** in the left navigation pane.
3. In the **Private Endpoint for Changefeed** section, click **Create Private Endpoint**.

## Step 2. Configure the private endpoint for changefeed

The configuration steps vary depending on the cloud provider where your cluster is deployed.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="AWS">

> 1. On the **Create Sink Private Endpoint** page, enter a name for the private endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Create Private Endpoint for Changefeed** dialog, enter a name for the private endpoint.
```

2. Follow the tip to authorize the [AWS Principal](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference_policies_elements_principal.html#principal-accounts) of TiDB Cloud to create an endpoint.
3. Enter the **Endpoint Service Name** that that you collected in the [Network](#network) section.
4. Select the **Number of Availability Zones**. Ensure that the number of AZs and the AZ IDs match your Kafka deployment.
5. If this private endpoint is created for Apache Kafka, enable the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** option.
6. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either **TiDB Managed Domain** or **Custom Domain**.

    - To use **TiDB Managed Domain** for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.

>     - To use your own **Custom Domain** for advertised listeners, enter the root domain, click **Check**, and then specify the broker subdomains for each availability zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either **TiDB Managed** domain or **Custom** domain.

    - To use **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.
    - To use your own **Custom** domain for advertised listeners, switch the domain type to **Custom**, enter the root domain in the **Custom Domain** field, click **Check**, and then specify the broker subdomains for each availability zone.
```

---

> title: Set Up Private Endpoint for Changefeed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Set Up Private Endpoint for Changefeeds
```

> summary: Learn how to set up private endpoint for changefeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to set up a private endpoint for changefeeds.
```

---

> # Set Up Private Endpoint for Changefeed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Set Up Private Endpoint for Changefeeds
```

> # Set Up Private Endpoint for Changefeed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to set up a private endpoint for changefeeds.
---

# Set Up Private Endpoint for Changefeeds
```

> This document explains how to create a private endpoint for changefeed in TiDB Cloud Dedicated, enabling you to sink data downstream to self-hosted Kafka or MySQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes how to create a private endpoint for changefeeds of your TiDB Cloud Dedicated clusters. A private endpoint enables secure downstream data sinking to self-hosted Kafka or MySQL.
```

## Restrictions

> - Only Organization Owner and Project Owner roles can create private endpoints for changefeeds.

Reviewer 2: Now the project dev role also has the permission.

> - Only Organization Owner, Project Owner and Project Data Access Read-Write roles can create private endpoints for changefeeds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only users with the `Organization Owner`, `Project Owner` or `Project Data Access Read-Write` roles can create private endpoints for changefeeds.
```

- Within the same VPC, each Private Endpoint Service in AWS, Service Attachment in Google Cloud, or Private Link Service in Azure can have up to 5 private endpoints. If you exceed this limit, remove any unused private endpoints before creating new ones.

## Prerequisites

- Set up your network connection

> ### Network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before create a private endpoint for changefeeds, you need to set up the network connection between TiDB Cloud and your target sink service.
```

> Private Connect leverages **Private Link** or **Private Service Connect** technologies from cloud providers, allowing resources in your VPC to connect to services in other VPCs using private IP addresses, as if those services were hosted directly within your VPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Private endpoints leverage **Private Link** or **Private Service Connect** technologies from cloud providers, allowing resources in your VPC to connect to services in other VPCs through private IP addresses, as if those services were hosted directly within your VPC.
```

<SimpleTab>

<div label="AWS">

> For AWS, prepare the following information. Refer to [Step 2. Expose the Kafka cluster as Private Link Service](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/setup-aws-self-hosted-kafka-private-link-service/#step-2-expose-the-kafka-cluster-as-private-link-service) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Apache Kafka service is hosted in AWS, , follow instructions in [Set Up Self-Hosted Kafka Private Link Service in AWS](/tidb-cloud/setup-aws-self-hosted-kafka-private-link-service.md) to ensure that the network connection is properly configured and get the following information.
```

- Private Endpoint Service
- Availability Zones where your downstream service is located
- If the private endpoint is created for an Apache Kafka service, you can use either a TiDB managed domain or your own custom domain for the advertised listener.
  - For TiDB managed domain, provide the ID for the Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern. TiDB generates broker addresses with subdomains per AZ. Configure your Kafka service’s advertised listener with these broker URLs.

>   - For custom domain, provide your root domain and specify the exact subdomain for each availability zone for your brokers.

Reviewer: reason: users can provide such info directly when they create the private endpoint

- Service Attachment
- If the private endpoint is created for an Apache Kafka service, you can use either a TiDB managed domain or your own custom domain for the advertised listener.
  - For a TiDB managed domain, prepare the ID for the Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern.
  - For a custom domain, prepare your root domain.
  </div>

<div label="Azure">
For Azure, prepare the following information. Refer to [Step 2. Expose the Kafka cluster as Private Link Service](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/setup-azure-self-hosted-kafka-private-link-service/#step-2-expose-the-kafka-cluster-as-private-link-service) for more details.

- Alias of the Private Link Service
- If the private endpoint is created for an Apache Kafka service, you can use either a TiDB managed domain or your own custom domain for the advertised listener.
  - For a TiDB managed domain, prepare the ID for the Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern.
  - For a custom domain, prepare your root domain.
  </div>
  </SimpleTab>

## Step 1. Open the private endpoint creation page

1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/).

> 2. Navigate to the cluster overview page of the TiDB cluster, then click **Settings** > **Networking**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/).
2. Navigate to the overview page of your TiDB Cloud Dedicated cluster, and then click **Settings** > **Networking** in the left navigation pane.
```

> 3. Click **Create Private Endpoint** in the **Private Endpoint for Changefeed** section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the **Private Endpoint for Changefeed** section, click **Create Private Endpoint**.
```

## Step 2. Configure the private endpoint for changefeed

The configuration steps vary depending on the cloud provider where your cluster is deployed.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="AWS">
1. Authorize the [AWS Principal](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference_policies_elements_principal.html#principal-accounts) of TiDB Cloud to create an endpoint for your endpoint service. The AWS Principal is provided in the tip on the web page.

> 2. Enter a **Name** for this **Private Endpoint**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On the **Create Sink Private Endpoint** page,  enter a name for the private endpoint.

2. Follow the tip to authorize the [AWS Principal](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference_policies_elements_principal.html#principal-accounts) of TiDB Cloud to create an endpoint.
```

> 3. Enter the **Endpoint Service Name** that you configured in [Set Up Self-Hosted Kafka Private Link Service in AWS](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/setup-aws-self-hosted-kafka-private-link-service/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter the **Endpoint Service Name** that you noted down when [setting up the network](#network).
```

5. If this private endpoint is created specifically for Apache Kafka, the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** is required. Enable the switch.

6. The advertised listener for Kafka supports both **TiDB Managed Domain** and **Custom Domain**.

   - If using **TiDB Managed Domain**, enter the same unique ID in the **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** that you used when setting up the Kafka Private Link Service in the **Network** section.

   - If using a **Custom Domain**, enter the root domain and click the **Check** button next to it. Then enter the broker subdomains for the corresponding availability zones.

7. Click **Create** to validate the configurations and create the private endpoint.
</div>

<div label="Google Cloud">
1. Authorize the [Google Cloud project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects) of TiDB Cloud to pre-approve endpoint creation for your Private Service Connect service, or manually approve the endpoint connection request when received. The project ID is provided in the tip on the web page.

2. Enter a **Name** for this **Private Endpoint**.

> 3. Enter the **Service Attachment** that you configured in [Set up Self Hosted Kafka Private Service Connect in Google Cloud](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/setup-self-hosted-kafka-private-service-connect/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter the **Service Attachment** that you noted down when [setting up the network](#network).
```

> 4. If this private endpoint is created specifically for Apache Kafka, the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** is required. Enable the switch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If this private endpoint is created for Apache Kafka, enable the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** option.
```

5. The advertised listener for Kafka supports both **TiDB Managed Domain** and **Custom Domain**.

   - If using **TiDB Managed Domain**, enter the same unique ID in the **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** that you used when setting up the Kafka Private Service Connect in the **Network** section.

   - If using a **Custom Domain**, enter the root domain and click the **Check** button next to it. Then enter the broker subdomain.

6. Click **Create** to validate the configurations and create the private endpoint.
</div>

<div label="Azure">
1. Authorize the Azure subscription of TiDB Cloud or allow anyone with your alias to access your Private Link service before creating the changefeed. The Azure subscription is provided in the **Reminders before proceeding** tip on the web page. For more information about Private Link service visibility, see [Control service exposure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/private-link-service-overview#control-service-exposure) in Azure documentation.

> 2. Enter a **Name** for this **Private Endpoint**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On the **Create Sink Private Endpoint** page, enter a name for the private endpoint.

2. Follow the tip to authorize the Azure subscription of TiDB Cloud or allow anyone with your alias to access your Private Link service before creating the changefeed. For more information about Private Link service visibility, see [Control service exposure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/private-link-service-overview#control-service-exposure) in Azure documentation.
```

> 3. Enter the **Alias of Private Link Service** that you configured in [Set Up Self-Hosted Kafka Private Link Service in Azure](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/setup-azure-self-hosted-kafka-private-link-service/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Enter the **Endpoint Service Name** that you noted down when [setting up the network](#network).
```

3. Follow the reminder to authorize the Azure subscription of TiDB Cloud or allow anyone with your alias to access your Private Link service before creating the changefeed. For more information about Private Link service visibility, see [Control service exposure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/private-link-service-overview#control-service-exposure) in Azure documentation.
4. Enter the **Alias of Private Link Service** that you collected in the [Network](#network) section.
5. If this private endpoint is created for Apache Kafka, enable the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** option.
6. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either **TiDB Managed** domain or **Custom** domain.

    - To use **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.
    - To use your own **Custom** domain for advertised listeners, switch the domain type to **Custom**, enter the root domain in the **Custom Domain** field, click **Check**, and then specify the broker subdomains for each availability zone.

> 7. Click **Create** to validate the configurations and create the private endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

7. Click **Create** to validate the configurations and create the private endpoint.
```

    > **Tip:**
    >
    > You can use the combo box in the upper-left corner to switch between organizations, projects, and clusters.

3. In the left navigation pane, click **Settings** > **Networking**.

## Step 2. Configure the private endpoint for changefeeds

The configuration steps vary depending on the cloud provider where your cluster is deployed.

<SimpleTab>
<div label="AWS">

1. On the **Networking** page, click **Create Private Endpoint** in the **AWS Private Endpoint for Changefeed** section.
2. In the **Create Private Endpoint for Changefeed** dialog, enter a name for the private endpoint.
3. Follow the reminder to authorize the [AWS Principal](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference_policies_elements_principal.html#principal-accounts) of TiDB Cloud to create an endpoint.
4. Enter the **Endpoint Service Name** that that you collected in the [Network](#network) section.
5. Select the **Number of AZs**. Ensure that the number of AZs and the AZ IDs match your Kafka deployment.
6. If this private endpoint is created for Apache Kafka, enable the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** option.

> 7. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either **TiDB Managed** domain or **Custom** domain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either the **TiDB Managed** domain or the **Custom** domain.
```

>     - To use **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - To use the **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.
```

    - To use your own **Custom** domain for advertised listeners, switch the domain type to **Custom**, enter the root domain in the **Custom Domain** field, click **Check**, and then specify the broker subdomains for each availability zone.

8. Click **Create** to validate the configurations and create the private endpoint.

</div>

<div label="Google Cloud">

1. On the **Networking** page, click **Create Private Endpoint** in the **Google Cloud Private Endpoint for Changefeed** section.
2. In the **Create Private Endpoint for Changefeed** dialog, enter a name for the private endpoint.
3. Follow the reminder to authorize the [Google Cloud project](https://cloud.google.com/resource-manager/docs/creating-managing-projects) of TiDB Cloud to pre-approve endpoint creation, or manually approve the endpoint connection request when you receive it.
4. Enter the **Service Attachment** that you collected in the [Network](#network) section.
5. If this private endpoint is created for Apache Kafka, enable the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** option.

> 6. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either **TiDB Managed** domain or **Custom** domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either the **TiDB Managed** domain or the **Custom** domain.
```

>     - To use **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - To use the **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.
```

7. Click **Create** to validate the configurations and create the private endpoint.

</div>

<div label="Azure">

1. On the **Networking** page, click **Create Private Endpoint** in the **Azure Private Endpoint for Changefeed** section.
2. In the **Create Private Endpoint for Changefeed** dialog, enter a name for the private endpoint.
3. Follow the reminder to authorize the Azure subscription of TiDB Cloud or allow anyone with your alias to access your Private Link service before creating the changefeed. For more information about Private Link service visibility, see [Control service exposure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/private-link-service-overview#control-service-exposure) in Azure documentation.
4. Enter the **Alias of Private Link Service** that you collected in the [Network](#network) section.
5. If this private endpoint is created for Apache Kafka, enable the **Advertised Listener for Kafka** option.
6. Configure the advertised listener for Kafka using either **TiDB Managed** domain or **Custom** domain.

>     - To use **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - To use the **TiDB Managed** domain for advertised listeners, enter a unique string in the **Domain Pattern** field, and then click **Generate**. TiDB will generate broker addresses with subdomains for each availability zone.
```
